**Goals**
* Learn to compile and run a C-code.
* Play with a few basic coding structures in C.
* Itentify and ready for loops in C. 

Below is a code written in C that draws a heart on the screen in ASCII charaters. 
The user is able to control the size of the heart by entering the nubmer of rows for the main body of the heart.
We are going to use this code to introduce you to C. 


```
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int i,j, rows;

    printf("Enter the number of rows\n");
    scanf("%d", &rows);
    /* printing top semi circular shapes of heart */
    for(i = rows/2; i <= rows; i+=2){
     /* Printing Spaces */
        for(j = 1; j < rows-i; j+=2) {
            printf(" ");
        }
        /* printing stars for left semi circle */
        for(j = 1; j <= i; j++){
            printf("S");
        }
        /* Printing Spaces */
        for(j = 1; j <= rows-i; j++){
            printf(" ");
        }
        /* printing stars for right semi circle */
        for(j = 1; j <= i; j++){
            printf("S");
        }
        /* move to next row */
        printf("\n");
    }

    /* printing inverted start pyramid */
    for(i = rows; i >= 1; i--){
        for(j = i; j < rows; j++){
            printf(" ");
        }
        for(j = 1; j <= (i*2)-1; j++){
            printf("S");
        }
        /* move to next row */
        printf("\n");
    }

    return 0;
}
```


**Compile and Run the Code** 

Login to the open DTN and clone this repositry in your home area if you have not already done so. 

Login help: See slide 10 : https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1xUCsLPY6ehkugdraxgoWCLAmrkWOod6IT0S07BYeDIg/edit?usp=sharing

To clone: 

```
git clone 

```

We will use Unix commands to change to the directory where the code is. 

We will use the GNU compiler to compile this code. The compiler translates the code into machine language that the computer can understand and writes an executable file for you to run. This initial translation of all of the code is what gives compiled languages their speed for HPC because no time is need for the computer to interpret the code as it runs. 

The compile command for the GNU compiler is `gcc`, Compile the code with:

```
gcc heart.c 

```
This generates a file that you can run (an executable) called `a.out’. a.out is the default name for an executable generated by most compilers. There are commands to give executables specific names, but we don’t need to do that yet. 

To run the program: 

```
./a.out
```

You should see a heart of the size you specified by giving the program the number of rows. 
Play with this code by running it with different numbers of rows. 
•	What part of the heart has the number of rows you chose? 
•	What character is the heart made of? 

**Put your Initals in the Heart** 

Now let’s modify the code by changing the printed characters to be your initial. 

First copy the original code to a new file called heary_mod.c

```
cp heart.c heart_mod.c

```
Then look at the file with vi. 

```
vi heart_mod.c 

```
To put vi in "Insert" mode type ‘i’. Your terminal screen should say -- INSERT --  in the bottom left corner. Vi behaves a lot like any word processor when it is in Insert mode. You can move the cursor with the arrows and delete and add charters just like you would in MSWord, but your cannot move the cursor with your mouse. 

Look for all the places in the code that have ` printf("S");’.

Replace the “S”s with your initials. If you like, replace different S’s with different initials from your name. 

To save your changes. Type “:wq”.  This will close vi and save your changes. 

Recompile and run the code. 

**Change The Shape of the Heart**


Now let’s try changing the shape of the heart. We’ll do this as an experiment. 

Line 9 of the code is the first i-based loop for the top of the heart, 
```
for(i = rows/2; i <= rows; i+=2){

```

What happens to the shape of the heart if we change `; i+=2’ on the end of the loop to `; i+=3’?

Make this change and recompile and run the code. 
 
What happens to the shape of the heart if we change `; i+=3’ on the end of the loop to `; i+=1’?

Make this change and recompile and run the code. 

So what is going on? 


The heart is generated by code structures called "for loops". Loops allow sections of code to be repeated a specificed number of time. Each trip through the loop is called an itteration. The heart code is made of sets of loops that depend on one another. These loops change the integer variables i and j through a sequence that uses them to count how many spaces and characters to print to the screen. Specifically, j controls calculating how many spaces and charters to print in each row, and i controls how many rows are printed and limits the maxium value of j per row. 

Let's look at the language of the loop we just experimented with from line 9.

 
```
for(i = rows/2; i <= rows; i+=2){

```
In English this says 
`For`  for

`i-rows/2;`   i equal to the number of rows divided by 2,

`i <= rows;` as long as i is less than or equal to the number of rows,

`i+=2` increment i in steps of 2. 

`{  ` Do this loop with all the code contained in the brackets. 

So, if you have entered 6 for the number of rows, 
this loop will start at 3, (6/2), and then move to 5, (3+2), and then to 7, (5+2), but 7 is greater than the number of rows, (6), so the loop will stop running before it executes that thrid itteration of the loop. If you compile and run the origial code, heart.c, you will see that if you pick 6 rows, the top half circles of the heart are only two rows tall. 

If you want to explore how the range of i values and height of the top if the heart change with the number of rows you choose, then copy your herat.c file to a heart_count.c file and add the following print statement just after line 9. 

```
printf("i %d",i);
```
The %d is formating that tells the program to print an integer. 

If there is time left, play with all the for loop limits to change the shape of the heart. 

**The donut code** 




**References**

Exercies based on: https://www.techcrashcourse.com/2016/02/print-heart-star-pattern-in-c.html


